Well, the point about the Richter was that he had memorized the classical repertory, which is all the Haydn, Beethoven, Mozart, Scherbert sonatas, piano works, and then he dies, and I imagine his brain goes off much like a television set.
So all those memories are gone.
That great library in Richter's head is gone.
when I read the Milton thing, because that scared me.
That really scared me.
Where did that go?
It's gone.
But the Milton thing of what books are, which is what, if Richter could have written it down, we would have known.
But he didn't have to write it down because he was a pianist.
So we can listen to him play it and imagine anything we like.
But I am now past
two years have been entirely absorbed, and I'm even obsessed with reading Shakespeare and Keats, for very personal reasons.
And now, in fact, I have a list that I want to show you.
Maybe you can help me track certain things.
Keats now is critical to me.
Keats?
Keats is critical to me.
And it's partly from my having gotten over an inhibition of reading great poetry, because, you know,
My lack of a college education always made me presume that if you didn't go to college, don't try to read The Great Masters, because that would be beyond you.
But I'm getting over that.
And so even reading Shakespeare seriously is having gotten over that inhibition.
And certainly Keats and Wordsworth, but the point of it is that in reading them, the purpose always is to find...
what you're looking for in yourself in them.
That's how I'd always done it.
If I was illustrating a book, then I'd look at William Blake, and I'd look at Goya, whoever, always with the joy of looking at work, but always with the not-quite-unconscious motivation that I will find me here, and I will take it, and I will use it for my own purposes.
But what at this point has brought you to Shakespeare and Keats?
It's very interesting to me.
Shakespeare didn't have a university education either.
I know.
And in fact, it was so amusing because once I began to read about everything about him, that amused me a good deal that the critics of the time and other playwrights of the time were very snotty and contemptuous of his lack of good Latin because he didn't go to a proper Latin school.
Yeah, exactly.
And so that was lovely to find the man I'm afraid of was as uneducated as I am probably.
But that's funny inhibition about...
Because I refused to go to college, and it hurt my father very much because of the three children, me being the youngest, I was the only one he could afford to.
He couldn't send my sister, he couldn't send my older brother, and I was the one who didn't want it.
So it was a slap in his face.
My sister would have given anything, but in those days it was worthless sending girls to college.
They were going to get married.
I mean, what else do girls do?
So she, who was probably intellectually the most brilliant of the three of us, was totally...
But you had such a passion for books and for reading.
Why didn't you want a formal education?
I just wanted to work.
And, well, more to the point was an almost congenital hatred of school.
I hated school.
I hated the confinement of school.
And don't forget, we're talking about the 30s now.
Now there's a certain concern for children who don't quite fit in or conform.
There's such a thing as reading disabilities.
We know all kinds of subtleties about handling children.
Not then.
You were just herded into a room.
You were thrown into competition.
The smart one sat in the front of the class.
The dumb one sat in the back of the class, where I mostly sat, because I was numb with anxiety at the endless competition.
So there was no pleasure at all.
It was no fun at all.
And to me, I didn't want to go to art school.
I was still schooled.
I went to the Art Students League simply to quiet my father.
But then you are really the product of your reading, of your observation of other artists.
And ripping off everybody who kept coming.
Shamelessly, right?
Shamelessly.
And one of the things you like, and we will get a Jim Marshall question in now, one of the things you say you admired most, like your good friend Jim Marshall's work, is that he borrowed.
He stole as ferociously as I did.
And we were both excellent thieves, which is one of the reasons we were excellent friends, because thievery in that department is utterly necessary to the creative act.
The whole point is that when you steal something, you cook it, and it becomes you.
If you can't cook it and make it become you, then you're just a cheap crook.
And there are lots of those around, too, as we know.
Some people borrow styles, and it's revolting.
But we prided ourselves on our adroitness,
We were really top-notch thieves, because we could take something, and there was enough of ourselves going, boiling with excitement.
It is like putting it into a night kitchen.
That's where that comes from, a night kitchen cooking pot, and serving it up, voila, a whole new dish.
It's Jim Marshall, or it's me, or any one of the few really terrific people who did books for kids.
Jim was probably best at that,
because he added to it an incredible intellect, an incredible cultivated sensibility, which made his turning it into himself something marvelous.
Because what I envied him about, a number of things, but was the simplicity of it.
Just making sure.
I mean, it's fine.
This is a very warm tribute, and of course this is the 20th.
Let's get rid of the martial arts if you can.
as I did promise Sandy Gore I might do this.
No, and I wanted to.
It's very important.
And this is for my column, which would be a nice 900-word column.
I've got two papers in Connecticut, by the way, and I'll certainly make sure you get tear sheets.
But this is a very warm tribute.
It's the 25th anniversary, I guess, of George and Martha.
And, of course, when you look at these pictures, they seem very simple, don't they?
Yeah.
Just very spare.
Yeah, but that's a great...
adroit beauty of it, that he was not an egotist, he was not a show-off.
Aesthetically, he was so principled.
And the amazing thing is that he started that way.
He wasn't like an artist groping and coming to style.
Jim just came out in full bloom.
When you think how early George and Martha is and how they were already hip, yes, there were refinements.
The Brother Goosebook that came years later is ultra wonderfully refined, but it's all there.
It's one of those rare things, because he was so smart, so verbal, so quick, loved the arts, music, opera, books.
I mean, our conversations on the phone had all to do with music we're listening to, what we were reading, what performances of what we were going to go see.
I mean, he frankly was the only colleague I had in the entire profession where we shared such complicated and lovely interests.
You do say that you believe he's the last.
Yes, I do.
And this is... Oh, that's not hyperbole.
It's not hyperbole.
No, that is not hyperbole.
That article I wrote, it was hard writing.
I rewrote it a dozen times just to make sure there was no hyperbole.
What is happening in the industry now, you know.
We all know.
It is the death of publishing as we knew it.
Let's face it.
It is kaput.
Really?
Yeah.
Certainly as I knew it, certainly a young person coming in as I did in the 50s, I doubt why things would be published now, since most publishers are desperate to keep a bottom line just to sell books, just to stay alive.
You think they're going to experiment with anything off the wall?
It's not possible.
Jim, now I was a lucky kid, lucky dumb kid.
I came into the early 50s, just children's book industry started in the 40s in America.
Bill Scott, who just died last week, broke my heart to read that, began it all with William R. Scott books and Margaret Weisbrown and Bruce Krauss.
I came in maybe five, seven years after the industry began, which was just coincided with roughly the end of World War II.
The industry as we know it.
I mean, there have been children's books.
The industry, yes, of course.
I'm talking about the picture book industry,
The business of picture books as a publishing industry where you can make money viable.
There was always, of course, but there were scatterings.
There was no, I think Bill pulled it together, whether he was conscious of doing that or not.
But he started a new industry, which was the picture book industry, as we know it.
And when I came in, it was just gusting into life.
And everybody was there.
And I was this dumb kid from Brooklyn.
And I had Ruth Krauss, and I had Ursula Nordstrom, I had Crockett Johnson, I had Dr. Seuss, I had, oh, you give up, I had, they're all there, older people, took me on.
They all took me home with them, they all stuck, I had Leonard Weisgard, who, thanks to him, literally took me home, and showed me how to do color separations, and told me how to read, and told me how to look at pictures.
I was an apprentice.
This is an apprenticeship.
I was an apprenticeship for 10 years.
I was apprentice to Ursula Nordstrom at Harper's.
I did any book she told me.
I had no taste.
I had no definition of what I was doing.
She said, Maurice, do this.
And then I want you to do that.
And I said, I can't draw that.
And she said, do it.
You don't want to just draw that.
You want to draw this, too.
I was trained.
So by the time the 50s were over,
beginning of the 60s, starting roughly with the Nutshell Library, I was blooming into an artist.
Late bloomer.
Unlike Jim, who was an early bloomer, I was a late bloomer.
Fortunately for me, I lived long enough so that I bloomed at all.
But that whole period of 60s, fabulous, the world was insane, but publishing was heaven.
And if you do all the crazy books you want, all the great Ruth Krauss books, the books I was allowed to do, which were considered peculiar, were denounced and banned and all that nonsense, still you could do it.
And that lasted right through to the end of the 60s, and we got to peter out towards the 70s when children's books began to make too much money, and we drew the attention of the wrong people.
We drew the attention of the suits.
Because mostly women ran these large departments.
And why?
Because the men wouldn't be caught dead.
And the kiddie book department was like the nursery in the third floor.
You never ran into the grown-up people publishing parties.
And that was a mistake.
We were having such a good time that we were being profitable.
And by being profitable, the men began to sniff.
Not the
the books that began to slip, the money that was coming in.
I'm laying on the table once I really can't stop.
Okay, could you just handle lunch?
Just bring it out?
Thank you.
That was the end.
No, it was the beginning of the end.
Beginning of the end was when Ursula was retired, as far as I'm concerned, mostly unwillingly.
And she became a pain.
her perfectionism, her fanaticism, Nordstrom.
And then things began to change very, very rapidly, and it became a much more, I'm giving you a very rough, gross, generalized overview of the whole thing.
But then becoming an apprentice in the 70s and 80s was getting harder and harder.
You had to come in, and you had to load the cannon and shoot your first book out and be a success in order to get a second book.
It's even worse now.
So you've got to score in the first time.
We are on a level of Hollywood now, where you read the thing, the movie comes out on the weekend, and it doesn't make big bucks.
And even the New York Times tells you how much money Men in Black made.
The New York Times is doing that.
That's amazing.
Right.
It's exactly the same in publishing.
If you don't make it on the first few days out, I'm exaggerating, only slightly.
It's true, though.
You're done.
You're screwed.
They're not going to publish you again.
A book's life now can be 30 days, 45 days, and if it's not selling with this return policy, it's back.
They don't even want to return.
They've got a pulpit.
We used to have books that were on the list forever, and if you didn't sell, well, it'll... Look, if this had happened to me, Night Kitchen didn't sell for years afterwards because of the scandal that arose.
Anyway, please take free software.
Thank you.
Maybe you should bring in another.
No, it's not yet.
Thank you very much.
How do you respond to a, and I'm not going to put you into a, you know, crossfire fire, but I did an interview with Anita Sylvie, an incredibly capable woman.
Yeah, she's a very capable woman.
It's her, and she's of course at Hope Mifflin now.
It's her belief that we're in a, and I didn't even think we'd be getting into this, but it's very interesting.
It's her belief that we're in a new golden age of children's books.
How do you respond to that?
She's talking, of course, technology that makes wonderful stuff available.
The artists who she says are now being attracted to the field.
I will preface what I'm about to say with I'm a 69-year-old man who lives in the country and is absorbed in my own work, in my own reading.
So I say that only to clarify that I don't know what's going on in the real world, okay?
I admit that.
I don't watch TV.
I don't dare.
But I don't agree with her.
I respect Anita tremendously.
We work together on Jim's book.
I don't see a new world at all.
The golden age, you say.
Look, I'm getting older all the time.
I'm in my golden years.
If these are the golden years, give me a raise and I'll slit my wrists.
I mean, getting old ain't perfection at all.
I don't know what she sees that I don't see.
All I see is a beautiful industry crashing.
Crashing.
How...
Do kids grow?
How do they have the time that I have to be apprenticed and work out and become fully developed artists?
There isn't that time.
I defy her to contradict me and tell me where that time is.
I think probably what she said in the next breath was, well, of course, children's books now account for perhaps 20%.
That goes back to what you were saying earlier of the sales.
Okay.
The sales ain't there.
If the sales ain't there, the books ain't there.
But maybe that's what she means by, you know, the... Well, also, maybe also between me and you, and you'll eradicate this on your tape, she doesn't have the freedom to say what I'm saying.
That's right.
She's a publisher.
What is she going to do?
I mean, is she going to really admit that she's in a nosedive?
Do you want some of this now?
I'll wait on that.
I'll have a roll, please.
Yes, sir.
And please take one for yourself.
I shall.
Coming your way.
This is lovely.
Thank you.
Yes, it is.
Thanks very much.
But that's what I mean by Jim is the last.
Because he got caught in a squeeze play.
In the sense that he began a little later than I did, obviously.
He suffered, as you read in the article I wrote.
He was ignored by the establishment in terms of awards completely.
just as Dr. Seuss was, because the books were funny and they weren't portentous.
They didn't teach children anything.
They weren't politically correct.
They weren't all those things that give prizes.
I'll always wonder why the Wild Things won the Coltican.
I'm sure there was a rumor I was on my deathbed and I thought they should do it already before the guy croaked, because otherwise I can't figure that out.
Do whatever you will.
But then what happened to him was his unhappiness and disappointment of being ignored, the fact that he never got to sell terrifically well.
What he didn't see, and what I didn't see, was that he was in the get-a-dem-a-rung of all of this, the collapsing of a system that had worked for 20, 30 years.
It was now being shrunk and truncated.
It wasn't time for a Jim Marshall.
He was becoming a kind of eccentric in his own time.
By the time he died, he was popular, but nowhere as popular as he should have been, nowhere as famous and beloved as he should have been.
And could he be alive?
I would explain it to him now.
and that he would torture himself as to what was wrong and what wasn't he doing.
It wasn't him.
The industry was changing right in front of his eyes, but it was so close to us, we couldn't see it.
But knowing what you know, would you advise him to do anything different?
No, no more than I would advise myself, which is continue working.
I'm continuing working, you know.
It's like asking a literary writer to try and write a bestseller.
How are you going to do this?
Well, precisely.
Nothing is going to change.
Me now, the sad thing is I think kids coming in, young people coming in, as I did, have this mindset that they're going to have to do a book that will be very popular, make a lot of money, be able to be merchandised, and hopefully some movie company will be interested to make a film out of it.
Now, that is the way to do a successful book now, as compared to me just having satisfied Ursula Nordstrom.
There was nobody else to satisfy but this woman.
So what do you think is persuading Houghton Mifflin to bring out a 25th anniversary volume of Jim's work?
Well, it's wonderful, because now everybody who hasn't known George and Martha will know George and Martha.
But I mean, what's persuading?
It's certainly not the marketplace, is it?
It's Anita Sylvie, who is a honorable forthright person who loves Jim Marshall's work, and she's a terrific editor and publisher, and she knows this is necessary.
So she's doing it.
She's doing the right thing.
I mean, and also she's publishing something which, God willing, is going to be a tremendous seller.
For people who love George and Martha, they've got an all-in-one volume, and for those who don't know it, they've got an all-in-one volume.
So commercially, it makes sense.
And it helps, of course, that you...
Yes.
Alive yourself with the project.
Okay.
I always feel uneasy about that.
I can understand that.
And I thought modesty makes me uneasy that I should be necessary to help Jim.
I don't even like that.
What I did it for was because I loved him.
And I miss him terribly as a colleague and as a friend.
And there are very, very, very few wonderful artists working in this profession.
And it's a lonely profession.
All art is a lonely profession, all commercial art.
You don't talk to writers.
The only conversations I have is with William Blake, John Keats, Wordsworth, and Shakespeare.
And you know what?
They don't talk back to me.
And these are conversations that you have, of course.
These are passionate conversations that I have.
These are intense conversations.
You asked me the question before which I averted because I didn't want to really talk about it because it sounds like...
putting out too many personal things here but it was the death of my brother two years ago which was catastrophic to me because this was the best person in my life to whose memory by the way you dedicated the Rosenbach yes and Pierre and Pierre because Pierre was his favorite novel I have them both with me these are my two very favorite latest great thank you I brought them with me well he taught me to love Herman Melville he was five years my senior oh yeah oh he was a great the greatest influence in my life
in every way.
And when I illustrated Pierre, the irony of the situation is that he died just before the book was published.
But the reading of Shakespeare came as a result of how to pull myself out of an emotional nosedive.
And I did what everyone has always done, what Melville did when he was... I'm not comparing myself to him except in this one instance that when his depression set in,
of the failure of Moby Dick and the failure of Pierre, he went to Shakespeare.
It's like some people go to the Bible, some people go to Shakespeare.
And Shakespeare was where I went like I scooted there.
No more anxiety about was I smart enough to read Shakespeare.
I knew this was my Bible.
And so it was for the first year after my brother's death and then
just little flickerings and senses and talking to people.
And I have called people whom I don't know who are amazed.
Am I calling scholars for Shakespeare?
I was at Berkeley and I lectured and I met Stephen.
I can help you on this.
Oh, you've got to help me on this.
Helen Bendler.
Oh, Helen.
I'm going to see someone in a couple of weeks.
I give all time.
Okay.
We have so much to talk about.
Shakespeare happens to be my, like don't even,
We'll get into that another time.
We'll have to do that another time.
Shakespeare and Keats, of course.
She's Keats as well.
She has a brand new book coming out from Harvard.
It's huge.
She treats each of the 154 sonnets and major essays on each one.
I called as soon as the proof came in.
I said, you must set up an appointment with
me, for me, with Helen Fennell.
Nick, if I may call you Nick, we have got to work this out.
This is a big project for the rest of my life.
And also, it's making me happy after something that may be very, very sad.
The Keats thing, I don't know what flicked me on to Keats.
Well, he's the best poet who ever lived.
Well, second to Shakespeare.
I think for pure poetry, I have to go with Keats, maybe.
Poetry and Menschkeit.
This is one of the most humane persons I've ever known.
Keats now.
Keats, yeah.
And so I just read, I know what it was.
Somebody said you have to read the Bates biography.
Of Keats?
Yeah.
Yeah, it's excellent.
It's an excellent, it was the first introduction, but not only was it excellent about Keats, it was excellent about the whole English romantic poetry movement, so it got me involved with Wordsworth and Byron and blah, blah, blah.
And mostly it set up the whole situation for me of reading Keats, because he quotes from the letters.
The first thing I did was read the letters.
I read all the letters.
I got the volumes, the letters to George, the soul-making letters.
And I'm thinking, how does this 22-year-old know everything and verbalize something I, in my late 60s, can't?
I feel everything at such a young age.
Yeah, and what is that?
What is that?
What is that kind of rare genius?
You know what?
He's Mozart.
He's Schubert.
Yeah.
These are the very tiny cluster of perfection that has appeared on this earth.
I love this person.
Now I'm reading the poetry, and I'm doing the same thing with Keats that I've done with Shakespeare.
Now I reached a point in Shakespeare where I found what I was looking for, but not consciously.
I just knew I was there, so I had to stop for a while.
And I then went to Keats, and now I'm reading Keats, and I'm waiting like,
Like, what do you call that?
A mine thing?
When you're looking for... That's what I feel like.
What is it called?
I don't know what you're saying.
What is it?
It's not a mine sweeper.
That's a ship.
Well, you know what I mean.
Like a guy who only looks for mines.
That's what I think I look like when I'm reading Keats.
I'm snuffling through everything, and when I find what I want, I'll stop.
Are you... I hate to use the word interacting, but with Shakespeare and Keats...
Verbally?
See, I for one believe that Shakespeare totally thought in images.
I mean, when you look at the imagery, the guy shoots you with an Uzi, I mean, with all different images that come at you.
He had to think in images.
I'll bet you think in imagery.
I do.
Of course I do.
Everything I read, I see pictorially.
That's what I do.
I mean, in terms of actually think in terms of it.
So I'm wondering now what you're getting out of Shakespeare.
Are you getting images?
Is it language coming for us?
It's language engulfed by images, or images engulfed by language.
One sweeping into the other or being eaten, engulfed is as good a word as any.
The plays, I was reading in a very disorderly fashion when I met Stephen Greenblatt at Berkeley, who's the Shakespeare maven, who's a wonderful man, became friends, and he guided me a little bit
and suggested, after my sort of maniacal, enthusiastic chatter, to read such and such plays, and I did.
He recommended Pericles.
So I went straight to Pericles.
It's the best play.
It's what?
I don't think it's his best play.
No, but what is going on in that play?
I choked him.
I'm sorry.
It's like saying Titus Andronicus.
Go ahead.
Well, we know that, you know better than I, that not much of Pericles is Shakespeare.
It wasn't even included in the first folio.
But what has to be Shakespeare is the death of the wife, the so-called death of the daughter, and the resurrection of the wife and the daughter, because he gets into resurrections from Pericles to Cymbeline to Winter's Tale.
which finishes with Tempest.
Okay?
I've been working hard.
When I read Pericles, when he casts his wife on the ocean when she dies in childbirth to his daughter Marina, his wife is cast in the waters and the casket lands on the sand.
Forgive me, Jim Marshall, I'll get right back to you.
She should be dead.
There was a magician living there
And they open it and they spell the roses and essence of flower.
This is Keats.
And they open it and Marina is fresh and alive and beautiful.
Shakespeare doesn't bother to explain.
How come?
He's not a religious man.
This is art.
This is not religion.
And I got so close.
My Geiger counter.
Is that the word?
Well, that's for uranium, but why not?
All right, fuck it.
Whatever it is.
But it's good.
But I like it.
But I like Geiger Conner.
I like it better than the other thing.
I was getting closer.
So then I went to Cymbeline.
That drove me crazy.
Because then we had the same thing.
Somebody thinks somebody's dead.
It's very dark.
That's beautiful.
The song that the brothers sing over what they think is the corpse of their new little brother, who's really a girl.
I mean, it's Shakespeare.
after Shakespeare, with sexes turned inside out, dead people who are living, living people who are dead.
But what did it was The Winter's Tale.
The Winter's Tale.
That's where I stopped.
I knew my Geiger counter told me, Moishe, here is the gold.
Stop here for now.
Really?
Yeah.
And I did stop there.
I read The Tempest because they...
It was always my favorite, but it was a wrong time for me to read it because The Winter's Tale threw me for such a loop.
The temper seemed pale for the first time, so I put it aside to read it again, but I calmed down.
Then I switched the keys.
Are you searching for something?
Of course, I'm going to write a book.
I'm going to write a book, and it will have to do in some...
essence way about my brother, but it won't be about my brother.
But it'll be profoundly about something I'm scouring for, which I'm always scouring for every time I'm going to do a book, and it takes years to start a book, and I'll be very patient.
If it doesn't get done, who cares?
Can you see it?
Vaguely.
Very vaguely.
Do you see pictures yet?
Yep.
I always see pictures.
I try to ignore them because
Otherwise, I'm seduced by pictures.
So I banish them.
My brain is like a Polaroid.
Never stops making pictures.
And I literally have to tear the film out of the goddamn machine so I can see language and just dwell on language.
What's lovely about Keats, I don't want to draw pictures to Keats.
I did watercolors to Shakespeare.
I couldn't resist.
And they're even being published.
Really?
By Cabin.
When might I ask?
Some have come out, but they're not very happy with it.
be careful with this please I keep forgetting this yeah I will okay otherwise I'll be if you'll feel comfortable we'll go over quotes okay okay you know the point is I the pictures I did are so intensely erotic because when I read Shakespeare I was I couldn't believe how erotic he was how he's like drenched in sex so so am I so when I drew these pictures I did homage to Shakespeare you know
Horny, horny images.
They wanted.
Are they doing it for kids?
No, not for kids.
These are cabin records of old Dick performances on CD.
These are for grown-ups.
So what's the problem?
No problem.
Not my problem.
Well, look, if everybody made such a fuss in 1970 over Mickey's dick.
No, we're talking about America, right?
Yeah.
which has a problem with such things as dicks.
I mean, a lot of people don't know what a dick is.
I think it's a cancerous growth.
Apparently, a lot of people never saw it in 1970.
I mean, who would have thought I would have opened their eyes to dicks?
A strange, disorderly claim to fame, wouldn't you say?
Right.
So, they're being surprised that I would see Shakespeare in such an erotic light.
Same thing.
Isn't Shakespeare nice with women in long gowns and men in doublets and
You don't expect them to be fucking or anything like that.
That's all I do.
Well, you got some flag for Pierre.
I mean, God.
Are you kidding?
He said, as understatement, I mean, you talk about erotically charged illustrations, but that's what you saw, right?
That's what I saw.
That's what I always loved about the book.
Because it was so hot because Melville is such a black comedian.
We will... Let's go back to Jim.
Well, I have plenty for Jim, by the way.
Believe it or not, we talked about 15 minutes.
Good, all right.
That's a lot of time.
That's a lot of quotes.
And I will write about... But I don't want to sound negative about putting the whole business down and Jim being caught in a trap.
Trust me on this.
All right.
I can say that.
I don't have to quote you on it.
Right.
Because otherwise, if anybody knows I'm a curmudgeon and I sound like curmudgeon,
The fact is, I'm not a curmudgeon, but now that I'm getting old, the old Susan, a curmudgeon.
I'll put it in a positive sense.
I mean, you say that you believe him to be the last in the line.
Right.
And we'll say that.
I'm not going to put you into a dialogue with people on all this other shit of a golden age and stuff like that.
The golden age.
I mean, I was amazed.
This is, you know, it's just not relevant to what... The golden age always makes me think of somebody who's so old they can't control their bladder anymore.
That's the golden age.
That's very, very good.
You know, I've gone through everything, I have to tell you.
You really, you're a writer, as much as you are an artist.
Oh, yeah.
Yep.
I mean, it's not often assumed about me, but I know it's true.
Well, I mean, I reread yesterday, I mean, from page one to the end, you know, Caldecai and Company.
It's the writing there.
If you want to look at a sweep, you know, a take on
a certain take on book illustration.
It's in that book.
I agree.
And the writing, even though there are little years and dates after them, and I'm sure, and I've read many of these from the New York Times or Book World or wherever.
Actually, a paper called the Herald Tribune.
A wonderful paper called the Herald Tribune.
Book World for the Herald Tribune.
These are, as you say of Jim's work, they're not dated.
His work is not dated.
These essays are not dated.
Thank you.
And I wrote your acceptance remarks.
These things are written to go beyond the moment, I think.
Thank you.
So you're a writer.
Yeah, but that's why I don't write them anymore.
I mean, the only reason I ever did the Marshall piece for Anita was because it was Jim.
I don't intend to write anymore except for myself.
Because you know this, too.
You're going to write serious essays and articles
Hey, that's hard.
Takes weeks.
Rewriting, editing, rewriting.
Did you really mean this?
Write it again.
It came to me.
Why am I doing this?
Do it for yourself.
You know, it's a Shakespearean key.
The book is brewing in you.
No more writing.
No more writing except for me.
I'm never going to do this again.
It's too hard to do it.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
No, that's it.
I did it.
I came out only for Jim.
That's the only reason.
Well, when you go to Shakespeare and the Keats and we're talking about a book, we're talking about, for instance, your best-known book, Where the Wild Things Are, one of your three or four, you know, one of your certainly, one of your great books, books that's certainly one of the books that's identified you in many ways.
Almost entirely.
It's 385 words, right?
That's right.
Very condensed poetry.
Do you think that this book that you're going to Shakespeare and the Keats for, that would be the extent of the text, right?
Yes.
And we probably, we would have to know that there are echoes of Shakespeare in there, like Keats.
I don't even care.
Maybe somebody like you with your reading and intuition will know that.
Maybe somebody, most people won't.
I read Keats poetry and I do what everybody does.
I underline and make little statements.
Take this, take this, take this.
I'm taking from a kid.
I'm 45 years older than this kid, and he's saying something better than I ever thought of.
I have to tell you, a couple years ago on my birthday, it was two years ago, precisely, my editor at home called, and I was in a pissy mood, and he says, Nick, what's the matter?
Your book's coming out in two months, and it's wonderful.
I said, Alan, do you realize I'm 52 years old today?
Today.
He said, well, happy birthday.
I said, you know who died on his 52nd birthday?
Shakespeare.
He died on his 52nd birthday.
I said, and my first book hasn't even come out yet?
Hopefully he had accomplished, you know, by the time... You have a lot of company.
No, no, no.
I'm not comparing myself.
I know you're not.
It doesn't make you stop and think about... I think Keats died... 29, wasn't he?
26?
No, he wasn't even 26.
He was approaching 26.
Look how many more years I've been given than he was given.
What is obvious that I think that
What he would have done with these years that I couldn't do because I'm not endowed, the unfairness of that situation, so did Beethoven die at 52 or 54 or something like that.
It's so unreasonable that Keats was plowed down.
In his case, we talked about Stephen Crane, who died at 29.
He was burned out.
He had nothing left.
He used himself up.
Keats was just...
He hadn't even reached it yet.
That's right.
He was just reaching it.
He was just getting there, and... It was stolen from him.
So any comfort we may take from the gods are watching us because we're artists and we're worth protecting is total bullshit.
Nobody's watching anybody.
And if you make it, you're lucky.
I'm serious.
If I... I was so late in coming to who I am as an artist, and I'm such a sickly person.
I was sickly as a child, sickly as an adolescent...
heart attack when I was 37.
You know, I never expected I would live to this age.
I just didn't.
I'll be 70 next year.
When's your birthday?
In June.
So, to me, being 70 is glorious.
I didn't count on it.
And I'm not there yet, so maybe I won't even get to 70.
Do you have a sense of where you are in this tradition that you come out of?
No.
I think I'm of obviously an older generation who adheres and believes in these great prophets like Mozart, Schubert, Keyes, etc., who totally believes they're alive and that my entire life's work, spirit, intellectual, in every other way, depends on my connection to them.
This whole new education in colleges where
You don't read Herman Melville because he treated women badly.
You don't read so-and-so because they treated kids badly.
It's so dumb.
It's so mindless.
Politically correct is like the death of a lot of art.
It's like white European males.
I know.
And Herman is one of them.
Herman is one of them.
Screw Herman because he kicked his wife down the stairs.
We don't know that.
He may have.
He may have kicked her twice down the stairs.
I'm sorry for Lizzie, but it doesn't change anything.
You know, what did Faulkner say?
One good novel is worth ten grandmothers?
I mean, I don't know what to call it.
Make it 15.
I don't know what to call it.
Rather crude, nonetheless.
But Scott Turow told me he's on the board of trustees at Amherst College.
And that he had heard, he was at the table with a president of Amherst College who was informed, this was about two years ago, that they had just graduated summa cum laude, an English major who had never taken a course in Shakespeare.
And the president, he said, we did that?
Did we really do that?
We allowed that?
And, you know, I did an interview with Harold Bloom last summer.
Oh, wow.
He's going to be in this book.
And we talk about, because I want to have a chapter on the canon.
by the way.
He made me.
Someone asked him about the children's book canon.
It was me and Salinger.
In fact, I read it.
I found it on the internet, by the way, preparing for this interview.
Did you see it, by the way?
No.
I only heard about it.
I'll be happy to send you a comment if you like.
I should have brought it with me.
I was so proud.
The junior canon, Western canon, they asked you to
In fact, I'm not going to ask you questions.
I'm going to try to stay away from questions that you've answered eloquently elsewhere, if that's okay with you.
Please.
I mean, I would like to talk about how music, you say, energizes everything that you do.
I'd like a fresh quote on that, but you seem to have spoken to that question half a dozen times elsewhere.
Unless your thought has changed on that.
No, let me think.
But you certainly are working more...
heavily with music.
Always with music.
I make strange partners in my own imagination.
To me, I don't know why I like Keats.
I've decided he was Mozart.
Now, since I've been listening mostly to Schubert because of the Richter thing, Keats is more Schubert.
There is
It's a completely, this is not, we shouldn't even go here, because it's a mindless little game I play in my own thing.
Well, we talked about, I think that's wonderful that you told me about the Shakespeare and the Keats stuff, because that's new.
That is brand new, yep.
That's new in my life, and it has invigorated my life.
I mean, I would say The Winter's Tale, it sounds facetious, has made me a happy man.
Hmm.
There are secrets in that play that will more than feed me for the rest of my life.
Really?
Oh, yeah.
Can you give me any specifics?
No.
I can't.
I don't know.
But is it something that resonates with your own life?
Oh, well, of course.
It has to resonate.
That's the Geiger count.
If it didn't resonate with my own life, I wouldn't feel this intensely.
Art teaches us about ourselves.
You know, you sniff around and you find out what you're feeling, what your idea is.
That's what great art always has done.
That's why Shakespeare is Shakespeare.
He does that for you.
Ibsen does it for you on occasion.
But I have to say, in going through everything that I could find on Maurice Sendak, is that, you know, and you've spoken to this, and I've pulled them together.
You know, we have echoes of Blake and Pierre.
We have echoes of Melville elsewhere.
We have echoes of
Dickens and the Brothers Grimm yet again.
You went and you immersed yourself for a week in Hans Christian Andersen.
You went to see Thomas Buick's study.
I had a heart attack there.
Is that right?
Sure, but it wasn't Thomas Buick that got me that excited.
It was just a bad heart.
It was a bad heart.
I mean, the kinds of things that you've done.
I mean, does the touching of objects, be they artifacts or be they text, is there something ineffable there, something that... I'm a collector.
I have to have first editions.
I can open up The Whale, first English edition of Moby Dick, six months before it became Moby Dick, even, in America.
And I can smell a copy that wasn't...
Hermann's possession.
This literally was in Hermann's possession because he gave it to his brother, Alan.
His name is in the book.
And you have that one?
I have that one.
So every time I open it, it's Proust, who I love, adore.
Because everything is Proust.
Everything is Proust, ultimately.
Open up our first edition and the essence comes out and I'm an arrowhead and there's Hermann and there's Alan and there's Augusta and there's Maria and there's a ganzer familia and
That's what books are.
Stephen Gould says this for my new book, by the way.
He has to, you know, of course, he's the scientist, the art fiction writer.
You are the artist.
I've got Humberto Eco as the fiction writer.
These are people I've interviewed for this book.
How does the text, how does handling the real thing... Here's Gould writing about science.
He said, I can't do it with facsimiles.
Something magical happens.
Yes.
And don't ask me to describe it.
Well, because he's right.
But the thing is, well, we don't even have to describe it.
We're animals, and we have animal natures.
And there is something... Yeah, I would.
Please have some for yourself.
I think it has a sensual component to it.
It must... It must... I can't explain it any more than he can...
Now, you also have manuscripts, I understand.
I have letters.
You have letters, which I've seen in the Rosenbach.
I'm a little anxious about talking about project collections only because there are maniacs all over the world.
So I have to be really careful.
And, by the way, I never say where people live, by the way.
Please.
And even... And you'll see in here, we work it out.
Okay.
Because I live alone here, and I have a lot of...
stuff here i'm not but this is not a book about collecting i know i know but i have to say that compulsively because i worry ultimately we'll talk about things i mean i'm not going to say i'm not going to mention sir but i'm not going to get into that he has a you know a manuscript of uh pierre or letters talking about this you know the things that were in the rosenbach that's you know i'll cite
have a scholarly bent, we'll go to that.
Something I have that I want you to see, but I don't want it recorded at all, but I think you will appreciate it, but I got it anonymously under a pseudonym, is a death mask of Keats.
This was made 24 hours after his death by Severin, who the young artist, I can't remember his first name, who was with him in Rome, who was terrified.
taking care of two young men.
And Severin is trying to get a reputation of painting pictures of Italian landscapes and trying to take care of this dying young man.
And he is the one who wrote Holm and described the terrible last months of Keats, the physical agony that he was suffering.
And it's his last letter Holm describing the moment where he said,
He called him over to him and said, 7-7, and he went to Keats.
And at this point, Keats knew he was hopeless.
He fought to the end.
He desperately didn't want to die.
He was furious.
The letters to Fanny Braun, his fiance, are full of rage that he can't have her, that she's having a life.
It's terrible.
There was no philosophy left.
So, well, I can't use it, so it's too bad I can't do.
Harvard, of course, has a life mask of Keats.
I have a life mask, but it's a commercial one, and it's probably not as good as what they have.
They may have, the death mask is very hard.
One was made, as I said, 24 hours after his death, mostly of his hand and of his foot.
The hand and the foot have disappeared.
Sever made the mask because he wanted to do a portrait of Keats later, which he did.
Unfortunately, he was not a very good painter.
and the portrait isn't very good.
He had the matrix for the mask.
His wife was so disgusted by it that she had it destroyed.
There were any number of them, but they're all gone now.
The one I have is the best one I've ever seen from photographs because it is intact.
It is not mutilated.
Usually they're scratched, worked over, repaired.
This is a real thing.
And it came from his...
Remains.
Came from his remains.
While the body perhaps was... When you look at it, I have the life mask in one room, the death mask in another.
It's only like two years.
The life mask is that fleshed face of a 22-year-old.
You can almost see the color of the cheeks.
Healthy, vigorous, English face.
Half smiling.
And the death mask is... The flesh is melted away.
24 hours already, the face is caving in.
But it's so incredible.
Because this mass covered that brain, too.
That's right.
Covered that forehead.
Covered those eyes that observed.
And does this, you know, this has to go through.
It has to be some... I am a living sieve.
Everything is going through.
And the Rosenbach catalog, a fellow who wrote the introduction, says you slept in Phil Rosenbach's bed, I guess.
Dr. Rosenbach's bare rug.
Is that right?
A rug thrown over his bed.
Rosenbach would faint.
They know what went on in those days where I said, can I have the Songs of Innocence and Experience, and can I have... You want real coffee put up?
You can have some?
No.
You sure?
Put it up.
No, no thanks.
I had plenty this morning.
Just put some water up.
I'll take care of it.
Okay.
I'll just be around here calling me when you're ready.
Um...
You notice I haven't said, and I don't really wish to pursue it to any great degree, and maybe only tangentially if I can, but you always find a subtext in your reading that involves children.
Yeah.
And, you know, I mean, I, for one, you know,
I think it's insulting to say these are children's books.
Well, I do too.
In fact, I have started, and I'm now, from my syndication, I'm doing a monthly children's book column just about children's books of what I'm defined as.
But I am treating them as books to be reviewed on their merits, on their terms, as writing.
That would be historical breakthrough.
And I've already got major newspapers that are picking it up because there's nothing else quite like it.
And I'm bringing everything I have to bear.
Do you realize that it is a breakthrough?
That when I fought for years, I don't fight for more.
I'll send you a couple.
I've done six now.
I do eight books a month each one.
I give each one like 200 words.
That's a lot of words.
For a book that's only 32 pages long in some instances, I go into the writing, I go into the story, the originality of the story, the artwork, what the artwork's trying to do.
If it's politically correct, basically I'm not interested in it, unless...
I mean, if this is trying to make a politically correct statement, that's not interesting to me anymore.
Well, to kids or to anybody.
Children are offended by that, to be treated as receptacles for pure morality tales, and for how to be a good little boy or a good little girl.
It doesn't work anyway, because they're all turning out to be bad little boys and bad little girls.
Did you see the article in the New York Times, which I thought was like
A Magna Carta of degeneracy is about two weeks ago why children's movies don't make it.
And it's because Hercules and a few other children's movies that came out had not been that successful financially.
And the people at Disney and the other people involved whose movies had not been successful said, I guess there's no such thing as a children's movie because we made our attempt
Children aren't what they used to be.
Children are barbaric.
Boys are degenerates.
They come in.
They're monsters.
They want to see killing.
They want to see this.
Who has made them this way?
They've been looking at shitty, corrupt movies and television for so long, and now it's a kids' forum.
So these studios have to conform to the new degenerate needs of American children.
I could not believe this.
I'll do a search.
There's no irony in the situation.
None whatsoever.
Totally.
They didn't make the money.
Okay, let's have more dinosaur movies where little girls are eating up for lunch or brunch.
Especially little girls.
The whole thing would have girls are of no use.
If a girl's in the movie, forget it.
No money, because no little boy is going to go see a little girl in a movie.
They actually said that.
setting up the kids for just what they wanted to do.
And I thought, the irony of the situation, I've been saying for 30 or more years, there's no such thing as a children's book, there's no such thing as a children's movie.
Now they're saying it.
But look at the reasons why they're saying it, and look at the reasons why I said it.
And it's depressing.
But your point is, a point is,
You refuse to insult the intelligence of the reader.
They say, well, your books are scary.
Maybe it's too scary for some kids.
And you respond by saying, you love the instance when a child is free to make any choice that he wants to make, she wants to make, and to see the consequences of that.
You know, rub two sticks together and see what kind of sparks fly.
I guess maybe it's kind of like... Exactly, and let them go.
I can't tell you how many... I got a degree at Yale.
A lot of kids came over.
Wow, first saw your book.
I was really scared.
And I really love it.
And you see the time that it takes to get involved into a work of art.
Okay, that's great.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
No.
Your father used to read to you, I guess, scary things?
He never read.
He made them up.
They were petrified.
These were all invented stories.
He couldn't read English.
They got that wrong on the net.
No, they got a lot of things wrong on the net.
In fact, the net is wrong.
You should talk about that.
Just today's paper, there's Kurt Vonnegut.
I love it.
I clipped it already.
It's already in my file.
It's hilarious.
It's exactly what's going to happen.
I have.
I'm going to do a chapter on books.
Books of the future.
And, you know, the consequences.
The fact that you can go in and fuck around with these things.
Completely.
Anything you like.
And attribute it to somebody, you know.
I'm getting tons of boxes saying, please autograph these books.
What the fuck are these coming from?
You track it down.
On the internet, there's somebody.
who, for a dollar, will send you the personal phone number and address of any artist you like that you want to have autographed.
I have no control.
I can't stop this man.
Somebody, we read wild things on the Internet, the whole text.
Really?
I just obliterated from my consciousness.
But even more threatening, of course, is the fact that people can vote.
There's no guarantee...
that the integrity of something that somebody... That's whatsoever.
His Vonnegut... His own wife... Comments are being attributed to him that he didn't make.
That's right.
And there's nothing he can do to stop it.
Nothing.
It's all over the world.
And really, it's going to take... It's a small thing.
But it could be something very significant.
It's a cute little remark.
But let's say it wasn't.
Let's say it was a slander.
What if I hurt somebody or destroy somebody's life or career or throw somebody to suicide?
And there were no editors...
There are no filters that this stuff is going through.
You just hear these schmucks on television talking about the virtues of this and the future.
Again, the golden age coming, right?
Well, they have a department at Brown University, which I'm going to get into, this interactive fiction workshop.
Bob Cooper is running it, where you start a novel and somebody else, the reader, can play with it.
And I wonder if people will be able to fool around with your pictures, for instance.
Why not?
They're already fully around my pictures.
You can get any picture of mine you like on the internet.
You can tattoo it on your back, on your ass.
Anything you like.
I have no control.
I cannot fight anymore.
You used to sue somebody for not asking permission.
Forget it.
But I mean, even worse than that, they can manipulate the actual artwork, the image itself.
What I do is, like a lot of people of my age,
I retreat from the entire situation.
I retreat.
I don't want to have anything to do with it.
I don't want to get email.
I don't want to know nothing about computers.
I don't give a flying fuck about the whole thing.
I'm lucky.
I can sit with my Shakespeare at my keys and draw my pictures.
It is mine, too.
It's so virile, isn't it?
I love it.
Thank you.
It's just how I feel.
It's a privilege I've earned.
I can afford it.
I can afford to turn my back on this cockamamie crap culture we're living in.
Fuck everybody.
But your father did... These were stories that he made up.
These were stories he made up.
Yeah.
He only spoke in Yiddish.
It was years later that he began to teach himself English by reading Marvel comics, Superman comics.
He graduated to amazing magazines.
then graduated to books.
We always go Yiddish at home when we were children, and he'd sit and he'd make up stories, and they were all shtetl stories from the old country of how the Poles killed Jews.
That was the basic theme of this was pre-World War II, of course.
Nightmare stories of pogroms.
I mean, I am an insomniac.
I wonder why I'm an insomniac.
That's the story he told us before we went to bed.
I'll give you an example of a story.
I'm going to just turn this tape.